Hi guys, my name is Victim Takur. Welcome to this video on data warehouse architecture. In the previous video I've given you a quick summary on what is data warehousing and what is data warehouse and what are the various properties of a data warehouse. In this video we will look into the standard architecture of a data warehouse used by most of the organizations. So let's get started.
This is the typical architecture of a data warehouse. So the first layer is the data source layer. As I mentioned in a previous video, a data warehouse is a collection of data from the various data sources of an organization. So all the data sources from which the data is extracted comes into this layer. The data can be extracted from various sources.
For example operational systems such as sales, agile, inventory, marketing and the systems data. Similarly, data from ERP systems such as SAP and CRM systems such as Salesforce, data from web server logs, third party data such as the market search data, survey data. So all these data come under the data source layer. So the data is extracted from a data source layer into a staging area using the ETL tools. Etl stands for Extract, Transform and Load.
The first step is to extract the data from various data sources into a single staging area using the ETL tools. Having one common area for all the sources makes it easier for the subsequent data processing and data transformation. So once the data is extracted into a data stating area, the next step is to load the data into a data warehouse. So before Loading with data, all the data that has expressed into staging area is actually cleaned and transformed as per the user requirements in the Gwen house. Basically there are two things.
One is the metadata, second is the summary data and third is the raw data. The metadata is basically a data about data. It is one of the most important aspects about the data warehouse. It helps the data warehouse analysts identify and find out what data is in the warehouse and where it is actually stored so that they can use that data effectively and efficiently to find out the information that they require. The third part of it, there also is a summary data which actually forms the part of data which is going to require it to get the information.
So generally we load this data using ETL tools in the nightly batch. It is not the real time data in warehouse based on the user requirements for their information and requiring purposes. We fetch the data from sources, summarize it and store it to its summary data. And the last part of the architecture is the presentation, which is a user interface for the analysts or for the decision makers which actually use the information from the data warehouse and make some decisions. Now the data from a data warehouse can be used by multiple tools and technologies for example, the OLAP OLAP is basically the online analytical processing.
It's an approach to answering the multidimensional analytical queries it allows or it enables user to analyze the multi dimensional data interactively from the multiple prospective consists of three analytical operations. The consolidation. It is also called the roll up, drill down and the slicing and dicing. We'll cover each of three in detail in a separate video for OLAP. Next is the reporting the various reports are generated using the data loaded in the warehouse to understand how the business has been doing, how the business will do in the future and what we can do to improve the business.
So these are the general reports that have been generated out of the data that is loaded into data warehouse and the last part is the data mining. Data mining is basically finding or discovering the patterns from the data stored in the data warehouse. The overall goal of data mining process is to extract information from a data set and transform into an understandable structure for further use. This information can be used to increase the revenue to cut costs to increase the productivity in some regions. It also allows users to analyze data from many different dimensions and categorize and summarize the relationship identified.
Technically speaking, data mining is a process of finding correlation or patterns among the people in a large relational database so this is a typical data warehouse architecture. Let me know if you have any queries on this. Hope you guys have liked this video. If so please hit the like button or subscribe to my channel for the future videos. Thank you.